shot noise (in e- source): fluctuation in quantity of carriers, per unit time. Modeled 	 as a discrete Poisson dist/process. The less events there are on average, the bigger role the shot noise will play. It applies to the keV source, as well as the electronics.

with scintilator + CCD, we would get noise/loss from e- -> photon conversion, and then fiberoptic coupling, but we can ignore these in a direct electron detector

Monolithic sensors are often very thin and so can't typically absorb 100% of incident e- energy, therefore there is some variation in the proportion of energy left, between particles even with the same energy. This is called 'Landau noise' and follows a Landau distribution.

Integrating readout will introduce a 'readout' and 'reset' noise, the latter of which may be able to be corrected by CDS.

If we reduce the beam current, we can operated a frame-based readout in 'counting' mode rather than 'integrating' mode. Counting modes have limitations (on speed vs beam current, to avoid pileup i.e. coincidence loss) but if applicable can eliminate readout and Landau noise.

We can get higher rate electron counting, if we used a hybrid readout configuration to allow in-pixel digital storage. This typically can operated at a much higher effective hit rate, as the frame vs beam current trade off is relaxed. Instead pile-up (i.e. coincidence) is limited on a single pixel dead time, with multiple hits able to be read-out digitally per frame.

Event-based readout is possible in both hybrid and monolithic architectures, any is (I think) exclusively used with counting detection. The difference is that hit counts aren't digitally buffered for the subsequent frame, but instead are sparsely transmitted out as they occur.








Mode of operation of detector affects how other noise sources contribute

dark current andnoise: can be fixed by dark subtraction, I guess this is just the 'baseline' leakage?
landau noise: variability in deposited energy (happens in integrating sensors, can be normalized out by counting sensors)


readout noise: (can be removed by thresholding?)


shot noise: temperature/frequency independent, applies to DC currents and HF alike (white noise). Therefore, at low temperature, as high frequencies, the shot noise may dominate, as flicker and Johnson noise reduce.
flicker noise (pink, 1/f noise): spectrally dependent, decreases with frequency 
Johnson-Nyquist (thermal) noise: increases with temperature

Normal shot noise is the square root of the signal? Something like that.

fano factor is a correction term to shot noise processes, which fits (recudes) the shot noise (which normally has a variance = value) to physical processes where one particle is producing others. For examples, charged particles creating ions in a gas, charged particles hitting a solid state detector, or visible light hitting a CCD or CMOS sensor.

In the case of a metal wire, the mutual coulomb repulsion between electrons regulates their spacing, and so there is almost not shot noise. But in cases where the carriers individually overcome a potential energy barrier, say a PN juction, this repulsive-cancellation doesn't occur.

Shot noise is distinct from thermal (Johnson-Nyquist) noise, as the latter occurs even without DC voltage or current flowing.  For example, a disconnected resistor, at thermal equilibrium, still internally has Johnson-Nyquist noise. However both are white noises, as so are difficult to disentangle even through their physical origins are different.


